All right.
In this optional bonus lesson, I want to do a quick review of JavaScript objects, properties and methods.
If you are comfortable with these ideas, you can skip this lesson and move on to the next one.
So as you may recall, we do have a playground JS file in our view project and this is where we're going
to experiment with various JavaScript and view concepts throughout the course whenever we just need
a scratch pad or a playground to play with.
So go ahead and open up playground.
Yes, you may have some content in it for a previous lesson.
In that case, you can feel free to delete it.
We don't need it.
And of course, in order to run this JavaScript file, I'm going to need to use the node runtime environment
and I can do so from my terminal.
So what I'm going to do here is go to terminal, new terminal in V code that's going to open up my terminal
on the right hand side, and I'll be able to run the file momentarily with Node here.
All right.
So let's talk quickly about JavaScript objects.
A object in JavaScript is called a hash map in other languages or a dictionary in other languages.
It all represents the same idea.
It's a data structure, and its purpose is to associate keys with values.
A key is basically an identifier, something that serves as a name for a corresponding value.
So for example, let's say we're trying to model a real world developer like you and me.
I can declare a constant called developer, and I could set it equal to a JavaScript object using the
curly braces.
This creates an empty object.
Right now it has no properties and values, or equivalently no key value pairs, but I can start to
create them within the confines of these curly braces.
For example, I can say that our developer has a salary of 100,000.
So in this case we have one key value pair.
The key or the property is called salary, and it is associated with a corresponding value of 100,000.
So we use these key value pairs to provide information about this developer object, right?
The keys must be unique so we cannot have another salary, property or key within developer.
But the values can be duplicates.
So we can have another thing here, like, you know, income or something set to 100,000 as well.
There's no requirement for uniqueness on values, but there is a requirement for uniqueness among the
properties or the keys because they are, again, identifiers for some kind of internal state about
the object.
So I'm going to remove my income and I'm going to write some additional key value pairs or equivalently
properties in here.
So for example, our developer may have an experienced level which can be represented in years and I
can make that year a floating point value.
So maybe they have 4.5 years of experience.
And you'll notice that what I've done here is separate every two key value pairs with a comma that is
a critical necessity.
This last comma right here is actually not necessary because there is no extra key value pair after
line.
There were three.
However, this is acceptable syntax and prettier actually prefers it.
It ensures consistency and actually makes it a little bit easier for your version control system.
Like get to figure out which line was added in a new commit.
It's a little bit more of a separate technical topic, but the point is we always need commas separate
in key value pairs.
And if you want to place them after every key value pair, that will guarantee that you've accomplished
that.
All right.
So we have a key set to a integer.
We have a key set to a floating point value.
We can provide any kind of value that we want, however.
So, for example, our developer may have a tech stack that they feel comfortable with.
So I'm going to write that tech stack property with camel case, meaning the T is going to be lowercase
and the S is going to be capital.
That is convention in JavaScript.
Whenever you have two words in a property name and here I'm going to set the value equal to an array.
And let's say our developer is knowledgeable of course in view maybe HTML and CSS as well.
And one more property value.
Let's say we have a property called Looking for work.
Like so and we're going to set that to a boolean of true and I'm going to say this again and prettier
is going to automatically populate our commas.
So this is an example of an object with four properties or four key value pairs.
Again, each one provides some kind of information about the developer and this is how we can model
real world ideas within the confines of a programming language like JavaScript.
We can make the construct of a developer exist in JavaScript because JavaScript doesn't know what a
developer is, it only knows what integers and arrays are.
But now we have this kind of real world idea that we can model in this language by telling JavaScript
everything that a developer entails.
They have a salary, they have experience, they have a tech stack and a status of looking for work.
All right, so what I can do is console.log in here to output anything to my terminal.
And we could take a look at the entire developer object.
So let me just console.log the developer object.
And right here in my terminal in this code I can run node followed by the file that I want to run,
which of course is inside my source directory and it's called Playground Dot.
J.S. went around that we're going to see our object output on the right hand side.
What I can also do is access any specific property on my object by using dot syntax so I can write a
dot after developer and then select whatever key I want to locate inside that object.
So for example, if I want to find out the value of the salary key or the salary property, if I rerun
this on the right hand side, we're going to access that key, that identifier, that name, and that
value for salary is going to be 100,000, which we're going to output and see right here on the right
hand side.
As another example, if I want to find out what my developer's tech stack is, I can just write in dot
tech, stack dot followed by the property.
And on the right hand side, we're going to see the value for that property output.
That is, of course, an array of view to mount and access.
Okay, one more thing that I want to cover, which is methods.
So the properties that we have here comprise the object's state, which means its internal data, the
internal details or characteristics that it needs to keep track of.
Now that data can change over time.
For example, when our developer gets a new job, we can imagine that their salary will double and perhaps
they're looking for work.
Status will now be false.
They will no longer be in the job market.
So what we can do is define a method and a method is effectively like a function that belongs to an
object.
It's a command or a behavior that we can give to the object that may change some of its internal state.
And the reason I want to introduce methods is because they have a different syntax than regular properties
do any index and we're going to be using methods a lot when we construct the view configuration objects
for our components.
So what I'm going to do here is define a method that's going to do as described.
It's going to double the salary and it's going to flip the looking for work flag.
So it's going to call this method double salary.
And the way this works in modern ESX is we can write the name of the method, then a pair of parentheses
in which we can put any potential arguments that this method will receive.
And arguments are operate the exact same way they do to a plain JavaScript function.
In this case, we don't need to provide any kind of arguments.
Then we provide our method body, which operates just like a function body.
So within here we can't just write salary like so, because within the confines of this method, JavaScript
doesn't know what salary means.
It's not a defined variable, it's not a defined constant.
We need to reference the salary that is available within this developer object in which our double salary
method is defined.
The way we can reference any of these external properties right here is by using a special keyword in
JavaScript called this.
So you can almost think of this within the confines of this developer object as being equivalent to
developer right here, but within the constructs or confines or kind of walled in world of developer,
right?
Because at this point JavaScript needs to define what developer is and we need to reference ourselves,
this object that we are in and that is represented of course by this.
So this developer object, what do I want to do?
I want to get the salary property on it.
All right.
What do I want to do with this salary property?
I of course, I'm going to get 100,000 here.
I want to double it so I can multiply it by two and by itself.
This is going to give us a value of 200,000, but we have not yet overridden our internal salary state.
So we have performed a mathematical calculation, but we haven't changed anything about the developer.
So what we need to do is overwrite the value of our salary property and the way we can do that is by
writing it on the left hand side, this, that salary and then providing an equal sign.
And this is totally valid syntax in JavaScript.
The way it works, in case you're confused, is always evaluate the rights.
Side of an equal sign first.
So when JavaScript looks at this code and evaluates the right side first, it says, What is my current
value of salary and is 100,000?
I'm going to multiply it by two to get 200,000, and then I'm going to set this that salary equal to
200,000.
So the salary will be set to 200,000, but only after we run the double salary method, the object will
start off with a salary of 100,000 and then it's going to double that when we run this method.
And if we run it again, then it's going to double it one more time to 400,000 and so on.
And of course, what I also want to do here is flip my looking for work flag.
It's going to be the exact same syntax.
I can reference this object with this.
The property that I want to change is looking for work and of course I want to flip that to now be a
false because our developer has found a job.
So let's take a look at how this works in action.
So what I'm going to do first is output the value of salary, and then I'm going to output the value
of looking for work when it was going to run this file from scratch.
So we can see they are indeed 100,000 and true, as is expected.
When the object starts out, then what I want to do is invoke or call or run or execute my method called
double salary.
So how do I invoke that method?
I have the reference, my object that I want to invoke it on, which is developer put a dot and instead
of accessing a property I want to access my double salary method.
And since it is almost like a function, we need to actually invoke it with parentheses.
So after I run the double salary method, these properties will change to their new values and I can
prove that they've changed by copying my console.log.
And only after we run the double salary method will the salary change to 200,000 and the looking for
work property change to false.
All right, so right here, I'm going to run my file and we can see on the right hand side those values
have indeed changed to their expected values.
All right.
So that is a quick review of JavaScript objects, properties and methods.
An object is a data structure.
It's a container for data.
It consists of key value pairs or equivalently property value pairs, which means pairs that connect
a key, which is an identifier like salary, experienced text like etc. to a corresponding value for
that attribute for that key such as 100,000, 4.5, etc. Our properties or our keys must be unique because
we can only have one identifier, we can only have one salary, otherwise we wouldn't be able to know
which value to reference.
So our keys must be unique, but our values can be duplicated and our values can be any kind of valid
JavaScript value strings, integers, floats, arrays, even other objects actually.
And then of course we have methods and we explore the syntax for that on line, sixth line, there are
basically functions that belong to an object, their actions or commands that we ask the object to perform,
and they can modify the object's internal state to access any piece of internal state.
We use the this keyword.
That's all there is to cover in this lesson.
So I will see you in the next one.